Add debug ping view how-to article (#280)
mozilla/firefox-data-docs: src/concepts/glean/debug_ping_view.md

# Using the Glean debug ping view

<!-- toc -->

## What is this good for?

> This enables you to easily see in real-time what data your mobile application is sending through [Glean](glean.md).

Reviewer: IMO this should start with the name of `this`:

```suggestion
Glean Debug Ping View enables you to easily see in real-time what data your mobile application is sending through [Glean](glean.md).
```

This data is what actually arrives in our data pipeline, shown in a web interface that is automatically updated when new data arrives.

## What setup is needed for applications?

You can use the debug view for all our mobile applications that use Glean (and enable it), including those installed from the app store. To enable this you need to run a command in adb that tags the outgoing data as "debug data". You will provide a debug tag, which makes it easier to identify your device in the web interface.

```
adb shell am start -n <application-id>/mozilla.components.service.glean.debug.GleanDebugActivity \
  --ez logPings true \
  --es sendPing baseline \
  --es tagPings my-debug-tag
```

_my-debug-tag_ is what will help you identify your data in the web interface, while `<application-id>`  is the application identifier as declared in the [manifest](https://developer.android.com/studio/build/application-id) (e.g. `org.mozilla.reference.browser`). The debug commands are documented in more detail [in the Glean README](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/android-components/blob/master/components/service/glean/README.md#debugging-products-using-glean).

### Supported applications

> As for now, the following application ids are supported:

Reviewer 2: We currently have part of the schema aliasing mechanism deployed. Although it doesn't pick up schemas and applications automatically yet, we can manually update config file to add support for more applications.

*   `org.mozilla.fenix`

> *   `org.mozilla.reference.browser`

Reviewer 3: @akkomar , do we also support [firefox-tv](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/firefox-tv/blob/1416b41b68f93adbf94803c4b9ae45d2b4330a8c/app/build.gradle#L23)?

Reviewer 2: Yes, we support: Fenix, &browser, samples-glean, tv-firefox and some debug flavors.

Reviewer 2: Note to self: we should remove this section after automated process for managing schemas is in place.

*   `org.mozilla.samples.glean`

## Where can I see the data?

The data is provided in [this web interface](https://debug-ping-preview.firebaseapp.com/). It lists all recently active devices and updates automatically. You can use your debug identifier to quickly identify your own testing data.

Any data sent from a mobile device usually shows up within 10 seconds, updating the pages automatically.

> ## Can you give me an example?

Reviewer 3: Any chance we could link or embed [this](https://github.com/mozilla-mobile/android-components/tree/master/components/service/glean#important-gleandebugactivity-notes) from the Glean SDK docs? We had a couple of bugs filed that made us notice that the supported flows were not clear :(

> For example to send a baseline ping immediately from the reference browser, with a debug identifier of `johndoe-test1`:

Reviewer 3: nit: should we use capital initials for Reference Browser?

If you triggered some event recording and want to confirm them you can use the `events`

```
adb shell am start -n org.mozilla.reference.browser/mozilla.components.service.glean.debug.GleanDebugActivity \
  --es sendPing events \
  --es tagPings johndoe-test1
```

**Note**: Glean will always attempt to collect data for the ping that was requested using the `sendPing` command line switch. However, if no data is recorded by the application, nothing will be sent. The `baseline` ping is _guaranteed_ to always be sent, since it’s populated by Glean itself.

## Troubleshooting

If nothing is showing up on the dashboard, it would be useful to check the following:

*   If `adb logcat` reports _”Glean must be enabled before sending pings.”_ right after calling the `GleanDebugActivity`, then the application has disabled Glean. Please check with the application team on how to fix that.
*   If no error is reported when triggering tagged pings, but the data won't show up on the dashboard, check if the used `<application-id>` is the same expected by the Glean pipeline (i.e. the one used to publish the application on the Play Store).

> *   Before April 12 builds, Fenix had a crashing bug around Glean. This is now fixed, please update.

Reviewer 3: Is this still useful?

Author: Yeah, probably not.

> *   Before April 12 builds, Fenix had a crashing bug around Glean. This is now fixed, please update.

Reviewer: Would it make sense to already add a year here?

Author: Or we just remove it, it shouldn't affect current users anymore.

> *   The reference-browser debug builds currently don't enable Glean. You could override this in local builds.

Reviewer 3: Fenix has the same behaviour.
